# Re-suspending Lyophilized Oligonucleotides

Synthetic oligonucleotides are usually shipped from the vendors in lyophilized form meaning the DNA solution has been freeze-dried to remove all liquid, leaving the oligo as a dry residue in the bottom of the tube.  The oligo must be re-suspended in liquid before it can be used as a primer in PCR, or for other molecular biology applications.  A common question is what liquid to add and how much?

To address the first part of the question: while you could simply re-suspend your oligos in sterile distilled water, TE buffer (10mM Tris, 1mM EDTA, pH 8.0) is recommended for long term storage.  Like any other DNA, oligonucleotides are more stable in TE because the pH is kept slightly alkaline by the Tris, preventing autocatalytic depurination that can occur under acidic conditions.  Additionally the EDTA chelates divalent cations required for activity by most nucleases, affording some protection from contaminating nucleases that may be present.

Some investigators are reluctant to re-suspend PCR primers in TE, reasoning that the EDTA may interfere with their PCR by chelating the Mg++ required for activity of the DNA polymerase.  A typical PCR contains 1.5 - 2.5 mM Mg++, while primers suspended in TE will introduce EDTA into the PCR at a final concentration of 0.1 mM or less.  If this amount concerns you, you can suspend your oligos in “low TE” instead of TE.  Low TE is the same as TE except the EDTA concentration is tenfold less (0.1 mM).  Therefore the EDTA introduced to your PCR will amount to no more than 0.01mM, which is entirely negligible.  Personally I have never had a problem using normal TE, and I prefer to have the added power of the 1 mM EDTA protecting my oligos from degradation during storage.

The second part of the question is how much liquid to add.  For PCR the oligos are typically drawn from a working solution of 10 µM.  However I don’t recommend initially re-suspending the entire primer stock to this concentration for two reasons.  First, what if you want to try a new protocol that requires a working solution of 50 µM?  The effort necessary to concentrate and re-quantify the solution would not be trivial.  More importantly, DNA is more stable at higher concentrations, so for long-term storage I recommend a concentration of 200 – 500 µM.  From this stock solution you can prepare aliquots of working solution at the desired lower concentration as needed.

The calculation of how much liquid to add goes as follows: 

µL TE = (nanomoles DNA) / (desired conc. in µM) * 1000

The nanomoles DNA present in the tube is listed on the data sheet that ships with the oligo and may also be printed on the tube label (look for “nMoles”).  Labeled primers from ABI may be given in picomoles (“pMoles”) in which case you divide by 1000 to get the nanomoles (e.g. 10,000 picomoles = 10 nmoles).  For a shortcut calculation, just multiply the nMoles number by 5 to get the volume in µL of TE (or low TE) to add to yield a 200µM stock solution.  For a 500µM stock solution multiply by 2.
When re-suspending oligonucleotides work at the PCR bench, wipe it down with RNase-Away, and wear clean gloves.  First centrifuge the tubes of lyophilized DNA in a tabletop centrifuge for one minute.  This will ensure that any dried DNA that may have broken loose during shipping is forced to the bottom of the tube.  Then add the calculated amount of TE or low TE.  I recommend using aerosol barrier tips for this step and I further recommend that you keep a separate stock of TE (or low TE) solely for use in re-suspending and diluting oligos.  While not terribly expensive they do cost money, and they are useless for PCR once contaminated by DNA.

Once the liquid has been added, cap the tube and vortex for about 15 seconds, then write the final concentration directly on the tube with a black Sharpie (other people may eventually use the oligos, and they will need to know the concentration).  Being smallish molecules, the oligos re-suspend quite readily so you can use them immediately.  You may want to make an aliquot of your working solution at this time.  For PCR I typically make a working solution containing both the forward and reverse primers at 10 µM final concentration (each).  If the oligo stock solutions are 200 µM a simple approach to dilution is to add 10 µL of each oligo to 180 µL of TE or low TE.  This yields 200 µL of  working solution containing each primer at 10 µM (10 µL / 200 µL * 200 µM = 10 µM).  You can simply double or triple the above volumes if you need more working solution.  For oligo stocks at 500 µM the analogous approach is to add 10 µL of each oligo to 480 µL of TE or low TE (10 µL / 500 µL * 500 µM = 10 µM).

For sequencing Sarah needs individual primers at 3 µM.  In this case for 200 µM stocks you’d add 3 µL of oligo to 197 µL of TE or low TE (3 µL / 200 µL * 200 µM = 3 µM), or for 500 µM stocks add 3 µL of oligo to 497 µL of TE or low TE (3 µL / 500 µL * 500 µM = 3 µM).  Again, just double or triple the volumes if you need more.

Store your stock solutions and working solutions at –20°C when not in use, i.e. when you don’t plan to use them again today or tomorrow.  Also, make enough working solution to last for a while.  You shouldn’t be diluting a new aliquot of working solution every time you do a PCR.  The idea is to minimize thawing and re-freezing of the stock solution, since repeated freeze/thaw cycles may eventually degrade the DNA.  For example if you have 100 µL of 200 µM working stock you might freeze/thaw it 20 times to make 20 aliquots of working solution at 1 mL each.  Each of those 20 aliquots might themselves be frozen and thawed another ten times for PCR setup, but even the last aliquot will only experience 30 freeze/thaw cycles, whereas if you made a new dilution every time you ran a PCR (god forbid!) the last aliquot would have experienced 200 freeze/thaw cycles.

Note: If you are still having problems there are calculators available at the IDT website to compute resuspension volumes for lyophilized oligos and dilution volumes for working stock preparation.  At the time of this writing the URLs are:
http://www.idtdna.com/analyzer/Applications/resuspensioncalc/Default.aspx/
http://www.idtdna.com/analyzer/Applications/DilutionCalc/Default.aspx/
